
# FAQ

## How does k0smotron differ from other multi-cluster management solutions such as Tanzu and Rancher?

As a multi-cluster management solution, k0smotron provides a distinct advantage
over the competition in that it allows you to leverage the full capabilities of
the management cluster. Most other such solutions are unable to offer the same,
as they typically provision a VM-based control plane and worker planes in the
same infrastructure.

## How does k0smotron differ from managed Kubernetes providers?

k0smotron offers heightened functionality over such managed Kubernetes
providers as GKE and AKS, including:

- Greater control and flexibility

    With k0smotron, you have full control over your cluster configurations
    within your existing Kubernetes cluster.

- Agnostic worker node connectability

    By allowing you to connect worker nodes from any infrastructure, k0smotron
    provides greater freedom and compatibility.

- Cost efficiency

    In leveraging your existing Kubernetes cluster, k0smotron can reduce your
    costs, in particular those associated with managing separate clusters or
    funding additional resources.

- Homogeneous setup

    k0smotron installs with a single command, which installs the k0smotron
    controller manager, all of the related CRD definitions, and the necessary
    RBAC rules. This approach ensures a consistent configuration across
    clusters and simplifies maintenance and management tasks.

## What is the relation of k0smotron to Cluster API?

k0smotron is a fully compliant [Cluster API](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/)
provider for [k0s](https://k0sproject.io/) that can be used with any Cluster
API compatible tooling. In addition, k0smotron is a Cluster API infrastructure
provider which you can use SSH connections to provision clusters on remote
machines.

## What do we meant by "from pets to cattle"?

A *pets* service model describes carefully tended resources that are nurtured
with care and given relatable names. When such resources have issues, it is
immediately noticed, and time and effort are expended to bring them back to a
healthy state. In a *cattle* model, the resources in question are not
given the same level of careful attention, and they are tagged rather than
named. Such resources are typically configured in an identical sense, and if
the health of one fails it is quickly replaced without much thought.

As cluster control planes are somewhat static, these are usually managed in a
*pets* sense. In contrast, using an operator such as k0smotron to manage k0s
control planes within an existing Kubernetes cluster is more of a *cattle*
approach, allowing for cluster management that is more scalable and flexible.
Such an approach makes it easier to maintain a consistent and homogeneous setup
across all your clusters, while also allowing you to take advantage of the high
availability and auto-healing features of Kubernetes.
